rejoice with those who rejoice. Weep with those who weep. You know, when you think of the ancient
nation of Israel, the Jewish people and how they responded to happy situations or to sad
occasions, as a general rule, they had few, if any, inhibitions. They did not hold back their
emotions, their feelings. They would rip their garments out of sorrow or stress, or they would
dance and cry out joyfully because they were so happy. Think of King David when the
Ark of the Covenant was brought to Jerusalem. Here was a grown man who was the King of Israel.
Second Samuel, chapter 6, verse 14 says, David was dancing around before Jehovah with all his
might. Picture David in your mind's eye dancing around before the Ark of the Covenant. But isn't it
wonderful, really, that David was so free of inhibitions that he did not even think or care for an
instant what someone might think of him for what he was doing? David was fully absorbed in the joy
of Jehovah and it's truly beautiful. Now, think of David's wife, Michael. How did she feel about
David dancing around in the street, leaping with joy? Did she rejoice with David? No. She was not
thinking either about Jehovah, his worship, or about the happiness that David had because of the
Ark of the Covenant coming to Jerusalem. Rather, she was focused only on herself and perhaps,
on her dignity as daughter of a king and wife of a king. But the joy of Jehovah was sadly missing.
She could not bring herself to rejoice with David who was rejoicing. It's really sad when you
think about it. She was a prisoner of exaggerated self-importance and pride. Many people today
show their emotions and many do not. Some of us may have been taught by parents or others that we
should refrain and restrain ourselves and not show emotion. And in some cultures, this is basically
the rule. Don't show any emotion. And we must admit that, yes, self-control is a good thing.
However, we do not want to be controlled by inhibitions, feelings that make us self-conscious
and unable to act in a relaxed and natural way. That type of control is really not necessary.
The Council from Paul tells us to be unafraid to show emotion and especially when comforting others
or when we rejoice with others. For example, I remember a convention back in 1968 in Washington,
D.C. My wife and I were serving as special pioneers at that time in D.C. And at the convention,
it was at RFK Stadium, the drama about Jehovah's Daughter was being presented. And sitting behind us,
that day was a district overseer in his wife. Well, it got to a very emotional part in the drama.
And I turned and looked back at the district overseer and I could see big tears coming down his cheeks.
Isn't that interesting? He was unafraid to show his emotions, his feelings, he was captivated by
the drama. He wasn't embarrassed because tears were flowing from his face. That is quite a
wonderful thing not to have such inhibitions that were so afraid someone might see us with a tear
running down our cheek. Haven't you become teary-eyed? On occasion, when watching a video, perhaps about
our courageous brothers, we've all had that take place. On such occasions, we should not be afraid
to show our feelings, especially when we go to comfort someone and be of help to them. Emotions
can transmit the feeling to others. They can see in your face, they can feel in your voice,
the emotions that you have. And many times, that can be more powerful than even the words you
speak to comfort a person. Something else that's good to keep in mind is that not everyone experiences
an express's grief in the same way. Some want to talk about it. And that's good, that's fine.
Others don't want to talk about their problems and difficulties. We respect their privacy.
Proverbs 1410 says this, the heart knows its own bitterness and no outsider can share in its joy.
And that's true. We can't really express fully what we may be feeling in our heart when we're
under a great deal of stress or faced with a terrible problem. The words really aren't there,
we don't know how to say them. Or if we're really joyful, it may be a little bit easier to speak
about how we feel. But this is a comment the Watchtower made about Proverbs 1410. It said,
can we always express our innermost emotions, whether sadness or joy to others and share with
them precisely what we are experiencing? And then it adds this question, and can one at all times
fully understand how another person feels? The answer to both questions is no. However,
regardless of what humans can or cannot understand about our feelings,
Jehovah does. And there are times when he's the only one, really, we can go to and open our heart
and realize that he can read our heart and he can see exactly how we feel and what we're going through.
It's good to remember that when we go to comfort some, when usually what is need is needed,
is empathy more than answers, comfort more than solutions. One sister who felt comforted by
fellow believers after the loss of her daughter said this, I appreciated it when friends came over
and just cried with me. She derived comfort from their company. A sister named Rachel,
whose mother became seriously depressed, had some interesting words to say because when a person
is emotionally distraught and depressed, they may say things at times that are rude and unkind,
even outrageous. And we don't want to always take them seriously as to what they say.
This is what the sister said about her mother.
Many times, mom would say something very hateful. Most of these times, I tried to remind myself
of the kind of person mom really is, loving, kind and generous. I learned that depressed people
say many things they do not mean. The worst thing that one can do is to return evil words
or actions. Yes, so we need to call ourselves down if we find ourselves in a situation like that.
Job described really what Rachel was talking about with some depressed people. Take your Bible and
look up Job chapter 6 verses 2 through 4. This is what Job said. Job 6 through 4. If only my
anguish could be fully weighed and put on scales together with my calamity. For now it is heavier
than the sands of the seas. And notice what he says next. That is why my words have been wild
talk. Yes, Job was guilty of wild talk and he admitted it. The next verse, notice what he says,
for the arrows of the Almighty have pierced me and my spirit is drinking their venom.
The terrorists from God are lined up against me. Well, he, he engaged in wild talk because of all
the pressure that that poor man was under at the time. So people say things, people who are depressed
say things that may shock us. We just need to absorb what they say and not try to correct at that
moment every wild expression. When calmness sets in, we may be able to help the person regain his
or her composure. Just as Eli who did with Job, he waited for a number of days before he spoke
and then when he spoke, his words were soothing and they helped to calm Job. So we may be able to do
the same if we apply the good counsel found in Jobhova's word.